an image is worth more than a thousand
words so I'm gonna start my talk by stop
talking and show you a few images that I
recently captured
so by now my talk is already 6,000 words
long and I feel like I should stop here
at the same time I probably owe you some
explanation about the images that you
just saw what I'm trying to do as a
photographer as an artist is to bring
the world of art and science together
whether there's an image of a soap
bubble captured at the very moment where
it's bursting as you can see in this
image whether it's a universe made of
tiny little beads of oil paint strange
liquids that behave in very peculiar
ways or paint that is modeled by
centrifugal forces I'm always trying to
link those two fields together what I
find very intriguing about those two is
that they both look at the same thing
they are responds to their surroundings
and yet they do it in a very different
way if you look at science on one hand
science has a very rational approach its
surroundings whereas art on the other
hand is usually an emotional approach to
its surroundings and what I'm trying to
do is I'm trying to bring those two
views into one so that my images both
speak to the viewers heart but also to
the viewers brain let me demonstrate
this based on three projects the first
one has to do with making sound visible
now as you may know sound travels in
waves so if you have a speaker speaker
actually there's nothing else then
taking the audio signal transform it
into a vibration which is then
transported through the air is captured
by our ear and transformed into an audio
signal again now I was thinking how can
I make those sound waves visible so I
came up with the following setup
I took a speaker I placed a thin foil of
plastic on top of that speaker and then
I added tiny little crystal
on top of that speaker and now if I
would play a sound through that speaker
it will cost the crystals to move up and
down now this happens very fast in a
blink of an eye so together with LG we
captured this motion with the camera
that is able to capture more than 3,000
frames per second let me show you what
this looks like
[Music]
thank you very much I agree it looks
pretty amazing but I have to tell you
funny story
I got an indoor sunburn doing this while
shooting in Los Angeles no in Los
Angeles you could get a decent sunburn
just on any of the beaches but I got
mine indoor and what happened is that if
he's shooting at 3,000 frames per second
you need to have a silly amount of light
lots of lights so we had this speaker
set up and we had the camera facing it
and a lot of lights pointing at the
speaker and I would set up the speaker
put tiny little crystals on top of that
speaker and we would do this over and
over again and it was until midday that
I realized that I had a completely red
face because of the lights pointing at
the speaker and what was so funny about
it was that the speaker was only coming
from the right side so my right side of
the face was completely red and I looked
like the Phantom of the Opera for the
rest of the week let me now turn to
another project which involves less
harmful substances as any one of you
heard of ferrofluid now some of you have
excellent should I should I skip that
part
ferrofluid has a very strange behavior
it's a liquid that is completely black
it's got an oily consistency and it's
got tiny little particles of metal in it
which makes it magnetic so if I now put
this liquid into a magnetic field it
would change its appearance and I've got
a live demonstration over here to show
this to you
so I've got a camera pointing down at
this plate and underneath the plate
there is a magnet now I'm gonna add some
of that ferrofluid to that magnet let's
just slightly move it to the right now
maybe focus it a little bit more
excellent so what you can see now is
that the ferrofluid has formed spikes
and this is due to the attraction and
repulsion of the individual particles
inside the liquid now this looks already
quite interesting but let me now add
some watercolors to it those have just
standard watercolors that you would
paint with you wouldn't paid with
syringes but it works just the same
so what happened now is when the water
color was flowing into the structure the
water color do not mix with the
ferrofluid that's because the ferrofluid
itself is hydrophobic that means it
doesn't mix with the water and at the
same time it tries to maintain its
position above the magnet and therefore
it creates those amazing looking
structures of channels and tiny little
ponds of colorful water and paint so
that was the second project let me now
turn to the last project which involves
the national beverage of Scotland this
image and also this one were made using
whisky now you might ask yourself how
did he do that did he drink half a
bottle of whisky and then draw the
hallucination he got from being drunk
onto paper I can assure you I was fully
conscious while I was taking those
pictures now whisky contains 40% of
alcohol and alcohol has got some very
interesting properties maybe you have
experienced some of that properties
before but I'm talking about the
physical properties not the other ones
so when I open the bottle the alcohol
molecules would spread in the air and
that's because alcohol is a very
volatile substance and at the same time
alcohol is highly flammable and it was
with those two properties that I was
able to create the images that you're
seeing right now let me demonstrate this
over here
and what I have here is an an empty
glass vessel it's got nothing in it and
now I'm gonna fill it with oxygen and
whisky now we just wait for a few
seconds for the molecules to spread
inside the bottle and now let's set that
on fire
so that's all that happens goes really
fast and it's not that impressive I
could do it again to show it one more
time but some would argue that this is a
complete waste of the whiskey and that I
should rather drink it but let me show
you a slow motion in a completely
darkened room of what I just showed you
on this live demonstration so what
happened is that the flame would travel
through the glass vessel from top to
bottom
burning the mix of the air molecules and
the alcohol so the images that we saw at
the beginning they are actually a flame
stopped in time while it is traveling
through the bottle and you have to
imagine it was flipped around 180
degrees so that's how those images were
made thank you
so I have now showed you three projects
and you might ask yourself what is it
good for what's the idea behind it is it
just the waste of waste case is just
some strange materials those three
projects they're based on very simple
scientific phenomena such as magnetism
the sound waves are over here the
physical properties of a substance and
what I'm trying to do is I'm trying to
use this phenomena and show them in a
poetic and unseen way and therefore
invite the viewer to pause for a moment
and think about all the beauty that is
constantly surrounding us thank you very
much
[Applause]
[Music]